## Capability types

Fuchsia components support many different types of capabilities. So far in this
module, the examples have showcased two distinct capability types: `runner` and
`protocol`. You may have noticed that the `protocol` capability requires a
routing path but the `runner` capability does not.

Some capabilities are **explicitly routed** to components by their parent, while
others are provided to all components **within the same realm** using
**environments**. Environments enable the framework to provision capabilities
that don't make sense to route explicitly on a per-component basis. By default,
a component inherits the environment of its parent. Components may also declare
a new environment for their children.


<aside class="key-point">
  <b>No ambient authority</b>
  <p>One of Fuchsia's <a href="/concepts/principles/secure.md">security
  design principles</a> is "no ambient authority" for programs on the system.
  This means that every operation must be scoped to an object capability rather
  than granting access based on a higher-level scope such as user identity or
  role.</p>

  <p>The component framework upholds this principle by ensuring that components
  only have direct access to capabilities explicitly routed by their parent.
  Access to capabilities provisioned through environments is mediated by
  Component Manager on the component's behalf.</p>
</aside>

The following table lists the capability types available to components,
and whether they must be explicitly routed from the parent component or
provided by the environment:


<table>
  <tr>
   <th><strong>Type</strong>
   </th>
   <th><strong>Description</strong>
   </th>
   <th><strong>Provided by</strong>
   </th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>directory</code>
   </td>
   <td>Shared filesystem directories provided by other components.
   </td>
   <td>Routing
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>event</code>
   </td>
   <td>Events generated by Component Manager, such as components starting or a capability request.
   </td>
   <td>Routing
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>protocol</code>
   </td>
   <td>FIDL protocols provided by other components or the framework.
   </td>
   <td>Routing
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>resolver</code>
   </td>
   <td>A component capable of resolving a URL to a component manifest.
   </td>
   <td>Environment
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>runner</code>
   </td>
   <td>A runtime used to execute specific components.
   </td>
   <td>Environment
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>service</code>
   </td>
   <td>Named groups of related FIDL protocols performing a common task.
   </td>
   <td>Routing
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>storage</code>
   </td>
   <td>Isolated filesystem directories unique to each component.
   </td>
   <td>Routing
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>


Note: For more details on individual capabilities, see
[component capabilities](/concepts/components/v2/capabilities/README.md)
and [environments](/concepts/components/v2/environments.md).
