## fi-0192: Protocol must specify openness {:#fi-0192}

Note: This fix can be applied automatically using the `fidl-fix` tool. All
instances of this error should come with a `fidl-fix` invocation pre-generated
in their output.

This error indicates that a FIDL protocol does not have an `open`, `ajar`, or
`closed` modifier.

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_bad.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/bad/fi-0192.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

To fix this, add `open`, `ajar`, or `closed` to the protocol. If this is an
existing protocol, you must use `closed` and should see the [compatibility
guide][0192-compatibility-guide] for guidance on changing it to `open` or
`ajar`. If this is a new method, you should see the [API
rubric][0192-api-rubric] for guidance on which to choose.

[0192-compatibility-guide]: /development/languages/fidl/guides/compatibility/README.md#open-ajar-closed
[0192-api-rubric]: /development/api/fidl.md#open-ajar-closed

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_good.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/good/fi-0192.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

FIDL is currently undergoing a migration in order to support handling unknown
interactions, defined in [RFC-0138][0192-rfc-0138].  This new feature adds three
new modifiers, `open`, `ajar`, and `closed`, which apply to FIDL protocols.
Historically, all protocols behaved as though they were `closed`, however at the
end of this migration, the default value will be `open`. To avoid confusion and
possible issues arising from changing the protocol default modifier from
`closed` to `open`, the protocol modifier is required during this transitional
period. When the migration is complete, this will be changed from an error to a
linter suggestion.

[0192-rfc-0138]: /contribute/governance/rfcs/0138_handling_unknown_interactions.md

For more information about unknown interactions, see the [FIDL language
reference][0192-reference].

[0192-reference]: /reference/fidl/language/language.md#unknown-interactions
