## fi-0191: Method must specify strictness {:#fi-0191}

Note: This fix can be applied automatically using the `fidl-fix` tool. All
instances of this error should come with a `fidl-fix` invocation pre-generated
in their output.

This error indicates that a FIDL method does not have a `strict` or `flexible`
modifier.

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_bad.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/bad/fi-0191.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

To fix this, add either `strict` or `flexible` to the method. If this is an
existing method, you must use `strict` and should see the [compatibility
guide][0191-compatibility-guide] for guidance on changing it to `flexible`. If
this is a new method, you should see the [API rubric][0191-api-rubric] for
guidance on which to choose.

[0191-compatibility-guide]: /docs/development/languages/fidl/guides/compatibility/README.md#strict-flexible
[0191-api-rubric]: /docs/development/api/fidl.md#strict-flexible-method

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_good.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/good/fi-0191.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

FIDL is currently undergoing a migration in order to support handling unknown
interactions, defined in [RFC-0138][0191-rfc-0138].  This new feature allows the
modifiers `strict` and `flexible` to apply to FIDL methods and events.
Historically, all methods behaved as though they were `strict`, however at the
end of this migration, the default value will be `flexible`. To avoid confusion
and possible issues arising from changing the method default modifier from
`strict` to `flexible`, the method modifier is required during this transitional
period. When the migration is complete, this will be changed from an error to a
linter suggestion.

[0191-rfc-0138]: /docs/contribute/governance/rfcs/0138_handling_unknown_interactions.md

For more information about unknown interactions, see the [FIDL language
reference][0191-reference].

[0191-reference]: /docs/reference/fidl/language/language.md#unknown-interactions
