## fi-0092: Too many table ordinals {:#fi-0092}

FIDL tables may only have up to 64 ordinals.

This error occurs if a table have more than 64 ordinals.

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_bad.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/bad/fi-0092.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

In order to allow growth beyond 64 ordinals, FIDL requires the last field of a
table to be another table. Any table fields beyond 64 must be placed in a nested
table.

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_good.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/good/fi-0092.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

Every field in a table incurs the overhead of a FIDL envelope in order to allow
the field to be optional. This allows every field of a table to be present or
absent and enables tables to be evolved by adding or removing fields, but at the
cost of much greater memory overhead than structs.

In general you can both avoid this error and reduce overhead by avoiding having
small, granular fields in tables. Instead you can group together elements that
you expect will need to be added or removed simultaneously into structs and use
those as the fields of the table. This reduces overhead and avoid running out of
ordinals at the cost of some evolvability.

This became an error in [RFC-0132: FIDL table size
limit](/docs/contribute/governance/rfcs/0132_fidl_table_size_limit.md),
which was intended to prevent users from accidentally incurring the overhead of
very large tables. This extra cost isn't very obvious in the schema, especially
in the case of a sparse table with may reserved fields or where fiew of the many
fields are used at any time.
