## fi-0194: Method result union payload cannot be empty struct {:#fi-0194}

Note: This fix can be applied automatically using the `fidl-fix` tool. All
instances of this error should come with a `fidl-fix` invocation pre-generated
in their output.

FIDL is currently migrating away from allowing empty structs as method payloads.
Previously, this was required for cases where the response of a two-way method
call required using a compiler-generated result union. Specifically, this meant
that any method defining an `error` or using `flexible` strictness was required
to spell out empty response payloads:

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_bad.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/bad/fi-0194-a.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/bad/fi-0194-b.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

The fix for this is to simply remove the superfluous `struct {}` instances:

{% include "docs/reference/fidl/language/error-catalog/label/_good.md" %}

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/good/fi-0194-a.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

```fidl
{% includecode gerrit_repo="fuchsia/fuchsia" gerrit_path="tools/fidl/fidlc/tests/fidl/good/fi-0194-b.test.fidl" exclude_regexp="\/\/ (Copyright 20|Use of|found in).*" %}
```

This small syntax migration aims to make FIDL more consistent and readable.
Previously, the `struct {}` was required in cases where FIDL generated a result
union to ensure that the wire format implications of using such a union were
always front and center for readers. However, the subtlety of whether or not
spelling out `struct {}` was required proved more trouble than it was worth, so
it is being removed from the language in favor of the new spelling.

<!-- TODO(fxbug.dev/88366): Modify when unknown interactions are fully activated. -->

Caution: Both unknown interactions and the simplified response struct syntax are
experimental features. This error will only appear when both the
`unknown_interactions` and `simple_empty_response_syntax` experimental flags are
enabled.
