# Advanced Plugin Internals

This page is intended for developers who want to understand FFX's plugin system
better. FFX is built on top of the [argh](https://docs.rs/argh/0.1.3/argh/)
crate. This crate imposes the Google standard for CLI parameters. The structure
that argh expects to define the CLI parameters is required at compile time.
Therefore, this rules out any runtime plugin systems as Rust structs cannot be
edited after compile time.

It also means that any dynamic ability to add plugins must come before compile
time. To accomplish this, FFX uses GN build rules to generate the final argh
structure from the supplied plugin dependencies.  You can see that code
[here](/src/developer/ffx/build/ffx.gni#35).

Plugins have access to the entire argh structure.
For example, the config plugin needs access to the "--config" flag
which is part of the `ffx_args` library:

```sh
$fx ffx --config "config-test=runtime" config get --name config-test
```

This means that the final argh structure generated needs to be supplied to these
plugins. This is why there are two libraries generated by the `ffx_plugin` template.

The Rust attributes that developers decorate their code with generates some code
at compile time as well.

The `ffx_command` attribute just creates the following code in the "_args"
library:

```rust
pub type FfxPluginCommand = <Your Command>;
```

This provides a known entry point into this library that can used by FFX while
allowing the developer to name their command whatever they want.

The `ffx_plugin` attribute does something similar.

```rust
pub async fn ffx_plugin_impl(<Your methods inputs>) -> Result<()> {
    <Your method name>(<Your parameter names>).await
}
```

The `ffx_plugin` template requires enough dependencies to allow for the code
generated by the Rust attributes to compile. Therefore the `ffx_plugin` template
gets the following
[dependencies](/src/developer/ffx/build/ffx_plugin.gni#99)
for free:

 + //sdk/fidl/fuchsia.developer.remotecontrol:fuchsia.developer.remotecontrol-rustc
 + //src/connectivity/overnet/lib/hoist
 + //src/developer/ffx/core:lib
 + //src/developer/ffx:command_lib
 + //src/developer/ffx/config:lib
 + //src/lib/fidl/rust/fidl
 + //third_party/rust_crates:anyhow
 + //third_party/rust_crates:argh
 + //third_party/rust_crates:futures
 + //third_party/rust_crates:log
