**Date:** October 19, 2021

**Version:** F1.2

The following updates have been implemented:

**Issue:** Integer overflow vulnerability in CacheOp.  
**CVE:** [CVE-2021-22556](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=2021-22556){:.external}  
**Impact:** Checks added for overflow and errors will appear in events of
incorrect ranges.

**Issue:** A11y color correction displays a pink hue.  
**Impact:** Color correction disabled on device first boot to fix inadvertent
color correction.

**Issue:** After some types of WiFi disconnections, device fails to reconnect
until reboot.  
**Impact:** Connectivity issue was fixed and testing added to improve
reliability.

**Issue:** DNS does not fallback to secondary DNS if the first query is refused.  
**Impact:** Network state stabilized and DNS resolver was fixed to handle
refused queries.

**Issue**: Media playback stops on all Nest/Chromecast devices on the same
network when streaming camera. Fuchsia devices were pausing remote sessions
during communication calls or camera streaming.  
**Impact**: MediaSessionController now controls local media sessions only.

**Issue**: Filesystem health checks fail early and can freeze during boot-up
process.  
**Impact**: Issue affecting devices getting stuck on boot-up screen was resolved
and health checks were improved.

**Issue**: Over triggering on devices during sound sensing events.  
**Impact**: Logs show the correct gain values, and they are not overwritten.

**Issue**: Camera not streaming when activated via graphical user interface
(GUI) or doorbell press.  
**Impact**: Camera streaming now activates after GUI or doorbell press.
