**Date:** March 11, 2022

**Version:** F4.1.1

## Updates

The following issues have been resolved for Fuchsia:

**Issue:** Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) calls immediately
disconnect.  
**Impact:** Device now generates random, unique call IDs, which prevents
disconnections.

**Issue:** Archivist memory slow leak causing devices to restart after running
out of memory.  
**Impact:** Archivist memory slow leak has been fixed. Devices no longer restart
after running out of memory.

**Issue:** If power failed during a block recycle operation and then failed
again during recording, the block being used for the recycle could end up with
a high wear count, leading to an assert, resulting in an unbootable device.  
**Impact:** The wear count has been fixed during block recycle to ensure source
block and destination block are differentiated from each other. Power failures
during recovery no longer result in unbootable devices.

**Issue:** Triggering factory reset does not always shred `zxcrypt`.  
**Impact:** Issue was found to not be reproducible. Symptoms found during
triage were misinterpreted as failed factory data resets (FDRs).

**Issue:** System continues to handle requests after suspend operation.  
**Impact:** Patch added to stop handling requests after suspend hook is called
to eliminate the possibility of rebooting in the middle of a direct memory
access (DMA) operation.

**Issue:** Intermittent, permanent read failures.  
**Impact:** Change increases the number of error correction code (ECC) read
retries, reducing the probability of flash transition layer (FTL) corruption.

**Issue:** Missing Call Provider AllowList Entries for Telecom Italia causing
calls not to go through.  
**Impact:** Calls are now able to be completed through Telecom Italia.
