**Date:** January 19, 2022

**Version:** F4.1

The following updates have been implemented:

**Issue:** MinFS should force a sync to yield free space when necessary.  
**Impact:** Enhancement to flush MinFS pending deletes to free space.

**Issue:** Unable to track write failures.  
**Impact:** Metric created for errors that reflect write failures.

**Issue:** Logging of large files relevant when the disk is full.  
**Impact:** Now able to track log large MinFS files when the disk is full.


**Issue:** Direct Memory Access (DMA) write-after-free detection.  
**Impact:** Diagnostics to guide future memory enhancements and optimizations.


**Issue:** Websites unexpectedly closing after 15-30 seconds.  
**Impact:** Websites now stay open for about 60 seconds.


**Issue:** Flickering during animations in Fantastic Beasts.  
**Impact:** Flickering issue has been fixed and no longer exists.


**Issue:** Netstack panic in `fuchsia_posix_socket` leads to device reboots.  
**Impact:** Timeout or connection reset no longer treated as a panic error.


**Issue:** Chrome crashing due to a crash in `net::AddrInfoGetter::getaddrinfo`.  
**Impact:** Increased the amount of space we allocate for Domain Name System
(DNS) responses with large numbers of addresses.


**Issue:** Chrome crashing during media playback resulting in a black screen.  
**Impact:** Issue resolved and black screen no longer appears.


**Issue:** Unexpected restart due to camera light sensor malfunction.  
**Impact:** Light sensor malfunction repaired.


**Issue:** Duo call reliability issues.  
**Impact:** Issue resolved and reliability improved.


**Issue:** Excessive logging from Actions on Google Hardware component.  
**Impact:** Logging reduced, improving usefulness of diagnostics.

**Issue:** Protect can violate copy-on-write.  
**Impact:** VMO data can be modified through access to copy-on-write snapshots of it.
