**Date:** December 9, 2021

**Version:** F4

## Updates

The following updates have been implemented for Fuchsia:

### Graphics performance

Flutter frame scheduling improvements for improved frame-rate. 

### Graphics quality

Improved rendering quality for WebGL games
by enabling 8x Multi-Sample Anti-Aliasing (MSAA)
in Almost Native Graphics Layer Engine (ANGLE).

### Flutter on Fuchsia

Re-implemented graphics and touch handling for Flutter,
improving performance and fixing several bugs around swipe gestures.

## Resolved issues

The following issues have been resolved for Fuchsia:

### WLAN policy

**Issue:** Scans that are canceled part of the way through
due to SoftAP startup or Connection attempt return a distinct error code
rather than `INTERNAL_ERROR`.  
**Impact:** Reduced time to get scan results when a SoftAP is being started.

**Issue:** Policy tries to disconnect and connect
when the developer is in the process of reconnecting.  
**Impact:** After being disconnected for certain types of disconnections,
reduced reconnection time from as much as 8s to 500ms.

**Issue:** Networks that disconnect soon after connecting are less preferred.  
**Impact:** Network selection is now less likely to choose a network
where the device recently lost the connection quickly after getting connected.

### WLAN drivers

**Issue:** Broadcom firmware was sending incorrect transfer ID
in block acknowledgements.  
**Impact:** The device firmware is working properly.

**Issue:** Multiple migration/installation/critical-component error reports
from a device.  
**Impact:** Disabled Wireless Network Management (WFM) firmware support.

**Issue:** Wi-fi transmit data path becoming stuck and causing link-down issues
and only recovers sometimes.  
**Impact:** Disabled multi-channel feature in firmware.
Also, fixed an issue where the firmware failed to reset the flowcontrol bit.

### System performance

**Issue:** Vsync showed significantly delayed interrupts.  
**Impact:** Replaced PageQueues Spinlock with CriticalMutex
so that interrupts are not delayed.

**Issue:** Significant time spent in O(n) accounting with preemption delays.  
**Impact:** Improved page queue accounting and reporting.

**Issue:** Significant delays in application threads.  
**Impact:** Improved accessed fault performance.

**Issue:** Page fault mapping.  
**Impact:** Caches the last VmMapping used to resolve a PageFault
as a quick check for future page faults.
