**Date:** July 22, 2022

**Version:** F6

The following updates have been implemented:

**Issue**: Enable contiguous memory management (CMM).  
**Impact**: Performance improvements were made on devices that prevent some
canvas games from causing an out-of-memory (OOM) experience.

**Issue**: Over-scoped mutex locking causing issues on device storage.  
**Impact**: Scope issue fixed on device storage and fixed volume buttons on
devices that were not registering being pushed.

**Issue**: Some Assistant features not enabled until a reboot after out-of-box
experience (OOBE)/factory device reset (FDR).  
**Impact**: A deprecated flag was turned down to enable an Assistant feature
without need of a reboot post OOBE/FDR.

**Issue**: Sound sensing failing on Nest Hub.  
**Impact**: Sound sensing notifications have been fixed.

**Issue**: A2DP audio loses connectivity after some time.  
**Impact**: Improvements made to Bluetooth connectivity firmware.

**Issue**: Updates needed from Chrome.  
**Impact**: Latest security fixes pulled from Chrome.

**Issue**: Socket mismanagement causing OOM issues.  
**Impact**: Socket cleanup logic and pre-loading was introduced.

**Issue**: Re-pairing Bluetooth devices fails on certain devices.  
**Impact**: Re-pairing of peers fixed so that they are enabled when they are
missing their link key.

**Issue**: Initiating a block write on FDR does not always flush to NAND before
the device reboots, possibly leaving user data undestroyed.  
**Impact**: Issue fixed to ensure zxcrypt is run on FDR to destroy all user
data.

**Issue**: NAND driver writing garbage data during reboot.  
**Impact**: Safe shutdown logic implemented into NAND driver.

**Issue**: Firmware security vulnerability.  
**Impact**: Security fix patch added to firmware.

**Issue**: Web_engine causing OOM issues.  
**Impact**: Vulkan heap size reduced by 25%, which reduces OOM issues.

**Issue**: NAND Device Manager (NDM) erroneously re-maps fatal errors.  
**Impact**: Fatal errors are no longer suppressed.

**Issue**: Low frame rates and jittery UI experience.  
**Impact**: Computation reduced in high CPU usage scenarios, improving UI
experience.

**Issue**: Minfs is running out of space much sooner than expected.  
**Impact**: Storage quotas have been implemented.

**Issue**: Compile errors showing up after update to libraries; security
vulnerabilities discovered.  
**CVE**: [CVE-2019-13103](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=2019-13103){:.external},
[CVE-2019-13104](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=2019-13104){:.external},
[CVE-2019-13106](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=2019-13106){:.external}  
**Impact**: Compilation errors and vulnerabilities were fixed.

**Issue**: Page faults occurring in heavy audio usage.  
**Impact**: Harvesting logic updated to not remove accessed sections that are
latency sensitive.

**Issue**: Firmware update needed.  
**Impact**: Firmware was updated to incorporate several security fixes.

**Issue**: Minor security fixes needed.  
**Impact**: Security issues have been resolved.

**Issue**: Outdated tooling workflow for `fssh` use.  
**Impact**: `fssh` tool was updated.

**Issue**: OOM issue sometimes occurring during startup.  
**Impact**: Thread mismanagement issue was fixed to prevent an OOM experience
 during start-up.

**Issue**: Increase in crashes.  
**Impact**: A potential future personally identifiable information (PII) issue
(user-agent string being logged) and a few specific crashes have been resolved.

**Issue**: Computer vision operation causing high memory usage.  
**Impact**: Vendor code memory leak was discovered and fixed.

**Issue**: Update needed for Chromium.  
**Impact**: Support retained for WebRTC.

**Issue**: Bluetooth headsets not connecting after a while.  
**Impact**: Retry connection logic now introduced after page timeouts.

**Issue**: CPUs can be considered in the same logical cluster.  
**Impact**: A scheduling fix was added and cluster assignment was fixed.

**Issue**: Compiler treats infinite loops in kernel as undefined.  
**Impact**: Fix has been implemented to help trace kernel panics avoid secondary
CPUs crashing instead of stopping.

**Issue**: Read disturb errors on systems that experience irreparable error
correction code (ECC) failures.  
**Impact**: NAND retries were reduced from 100 to 10 to get 99.5% of the
effectiveness with only 10% of the reads.

**Issue**: Some apps can run out of protected memory.  
**Impact**: Protected memory pool size was increased.

**Issue**: Possible unwanted data could be captured and shown in Fuchsia syslogs
stored on client device.  
**Impact**: Fix was implemented to prevent logging of unwanted data in Fuchsia
syslogs.

**Issue**: Slow DNS query response/video playback low quality and delayed.  
**Impact**: Logic introduced to respect preferred name servers and fix DNS
resolver.

**Issue**: Thread accounting and deadline yield is not optimal.  
**Impact**: Latency improved in Netstack via making threads backing routines
follow a deadline profile.

**Issue**: Devices can become nonfunctional due to filesystem instability.  
**Impact**: Stability of filesystem dramatically increased with changing raw
NAND driver timing.
