**Date:** October 31, 2022

**Version:** F8.0

The following updates have been implemented.

### Component Framework

The number of component manifest (.cmx) files decreased ~85%, from 1167 files to 189.

### Connectivity (Bluetooth, IOT, WLAN, Netstack)

#### WLAN

##### Core

-   Improvements have been made for the following:
    -   WPA1, WPA2, and WPA3 compatibility for legacy APs.
    -   Internal WEP key encoding/decoding.
    -   Internal handling of supported rates and authentications.
-   FullMAC and SoftMAC reconnect APIs have been simplified.
-   Migration to fuchsia.wlan.sme.GenericSme API has been completed.

##### Drivers

Broadcom WLAN driver (brcmfmac) updates include the following:

-   Migrated to netdevice model for data path operations, and new (re)connect API, which also helps with simpler WEP key handling.
-   Race condition in EAPOL message handshake has been fixed.

##### Netstack

Netdevice WLAN migration completed to improve performance. See more details in the [Drivers](#heading=h.j94ndet0dlc4) section.

##### Thread

-   Provisional Thread 1.3 Certification has been provided.
-   Thread network now creates/starts automatically.
-   Thread border routing has been enabled.

### Graphics and Media

-   Power efficiency improvements.
-   Various memory-saving changes have been made, resulting in more reliable media playback.

### HCI (Input, A11y, i18n, and View System)

-   Mouse acceleration has been implemented.
-   Emoji fonts have been added.

### Rust

**Issue**: An issue preventing rustup users from linking binaries for Fuchsia.

**Link**: [Use llvm-libunwind="in-tree" for Fuchsia targets](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/100341){: .external}

**Impact**: Issue has been fixed.

### Software Assembly

-   `ffx assembly` now supports setting session URLs at assembly time, which allows reconfiguration of the session without rebuilding the platform.
-   `ffx assembly` now supports product-provided base packages, cache packages, and config_data for both of those package sets.

### Software Delivery

-   Eager package updates have been introduced into omaha-client and pkg-resolver. Update for the Omaha Client Update Protocol to support persistence of updated packages across reboots.
-   pkgfs removed and replaced its functionality with pkg-cache, written in Rust.

### Testing

The following updates have been made for Platform:

-   Various stability fixes.
-   Support added for running out-of-tree (OOT) tests.
-   Refactored and simplified code path.

### Trusted Platform Services (TPS)

Simplified the account APIs to remove features that were no longer required.

### Virtualization

-   The virtio_block device has been migrated from C++ to Rust.
-   The bulk of virtualization components have been converted to CFv2.
-   Support has been added for creating guests with more than 4GiB of memory.

